♪ Opening Song ♪
[NARRATOR] The world
we live in is filled with
thousands upon
thousands of caves.
Legend has it that people
who vanish into thin air
are doomed to wander aimlessly
within these caves forever.
Without their memories...
...and without their souls...
[birds chirping]
[muffled rattling]
[GINKO]
A letter?
[rattling]
All torn up again.
I think it's about time
for a new uro.
This one is old.
[GINKO] Wait. This isn't
addressed to me.
Aya?
[knock, knock]
[GINKO] Hello, Aya.
How've you been?
[AYA]
Ginko.
I was thinking the other day
it was about time
to replace your uro.
[GINKO] Yeah. Letters have
been arriving cut off.
And I'm getting
other people's messages.
[gasps]
So, you're still doing it, huh?
Still trying to
reach her by letter?
And what's wrong with that?
[GINKO]
You know what.
And if Jiisama
knew you were still
obsessing about her
like this,
he'd be rolling over
in his grave right now.
Ito's alive, somewhere.
I know it.
But there's no way
to bring her back.
[GINKO]
Aya. Let her go.
Call it fate
and leave it at that.
[ITO] Aya, look.
This cocoon. It's empty.
[AYA] Yeah, you're right.
That's strange.
[ITO] What do you think happened
to whatever was inside?
Did it leave?
[FATHER] Aya, Ito. Put that
thing down, right now.
[FATHER] Listen. You mustn't
pick up empty cocoons like that.
What? Why not?
[FATHER] If the pupa's gone,
bad things crawl inside
to take its place.
[door scratches open]
It's the elder
from the main house.
He's back.
He's been here a lot lately.
[door scratches open]
Girls, I... I need you
to come with me.
Ito, Aya.
Think back a moment.
Do you remember Jiisama,
the old man who lives up
in the mountains?
Jiisama? Who's that?
[ELDER] It's all right.
You were only two years old
when you met him last.
Whenever children
are born into this family,
it is customary for Jiisama
to come and evaluate them
for certain special traits.
[JIISAMA]
Very interesting.
It would seem
both of these children
are able to see
the uro in this jar.
When they are ten years old,
I'll return, and then...
...one child will come with me.
[ELDER] Jiisama is
an uro-mori: a guardian.
It's a tradition
that has been passed down
through the Tozawa family
for generations.
But until your birth,
no one with promise
has surfaced for many years.
Thus, it has fallen to you
to keep the tradition alive.
This isn't easy,
but one of you girls
must go with Jiisama.
And since your parents
cannot decide, then I will.
Which one of you is Aya,
the younger sister?
[gasps]
That's... me...
Elder, please. Let me go.
No! What are you doing?!
It's all right.
No, wait!
If Ito's gonna go, well...
...then I'm going, too!
[MOTHER]
Aya...
Very well.
I can't imagine
how difficult it must be
to send one child away,
let alone two,
but if you think about it,
this may be for the best.
After all, Jiisama is old.
He probably doesn't have
much longer to live.
Once he does finally pass away,
living alone in those
mountains would be miserable.
If they're together,
it may help to ease
the loneliness somewhat.
[ELDER]
But, listen.
It's not as though
you'll never see them again.
[JIISAMA] You must always
leave the door slightly open.
If you don't, the uro
will swallow us up.
Thank you for coming.
Now please, make
yourselves at home. Sit.
I've waited a long time
for this day.
I was beginning to fear
it would never come.
And I certainly never expected
two apprentices at once.
Tell me, have you lived
alone here your whole life?
[JIISAMA]
For the most part.
Ever since the old woman I
apprenticed under passed away.
I don't get much
in the way of company,
just the occasional
mushi master who happens by.
Until now, at least,
their stories were really
all I had to look forward to.
[gasps]
Oh, yes...
[JIISAMA] I thought
I'd begin our time together
by telling
a few of them to you.
I must have written down
hundreds over the years.
What do you say? Are you
ready to get started?
[ITO] Hey, you found
another empty one.
There's a lot here.
We never had this many
around our village.
Girls, tell me something.
Do you know what tamamayu are?
[AYA]
Mhm!
They're cocoons that have
two pupa in them. Right?
And they're really big.
[JIISAMA] Correct. Now,
I want you to go and find
empty ones like that
and bring them to me.
They are essential. We couldn't
do our work without them.
[stairs creaking]
[gasps in awe]
[JIISAMA] A normal cocoon
contains only one thread,
useless for our purposes.
But tamamayu
are made by two pupa,
so they consist of two threads.
I unwind them and remake
them into two cocoons.
Since this makes
its "home" much thinner,
the uro that
lives inside becomes confused.
So confused that
it comes out of the cocoon.
[JIISAMA]
Aya! Use that to scoop it up!
[gasps]
Well done. Now just
place the uro in here.
[JIISAMA]
Now it's sealed in.
[JIISAMA] For the time being,
the uro will only be able
to travel back and forth
between these two cocoons,
and nowhere else.
[knock on door]
[DELIVERYMAN]
Jiisama! Letter for you!
Ah. Now then.
Whose turn was it next?
Remind me.
What's the letter say?
[JIISAMA]
It's not addressed to me.
Often times it's a request
to send a mushi master.
Sometimes, a personal letter
from the mushi master's friend.
Ah, yes, here's the one.
Mushi masters never stay
in one place for too long.
They're not easy to locate.
But if I put a letter
into cocoon one...
...the uro will deliver
it to the mushi master
who has cocoon two,
no matter where they may be.
The cocoons work well
for a while,
but they need to be
replaced every few years.
That's because of the uro.
Over time, it opens up an uro
passageway inside the cocoon.
Eventually, it penetrates
its way through
to a closed room somewhere,
or even another uro passageway.
When that begins to happen,
letters stop being
delivered reliably.
Uro are neat.
Don't you think so?
Hey, Jiisama. Do you think
I can put
the letter in next time?
Ito. Aya. Listen. You must
never underestimate the uro .
Uro are mushi.
Powerful mushi that can
open up holes in our world.
You must always
treat them with caution.
[JIISAMA] Many uro live
in the mountains and forests
that surround our home,
and they breed wherever
they can find an enclosed space.
That's why you must never fully
close any of the doors.
If you happen to
close a door by mistake,
you must not open it.
If you do and
the uro are inside...
...then you will be
swept into an uro passageway
along with the escaping uro.
These uro...
They cannot survive
very long at all
outside of closed spaces.
What happens to you if...
you're sucked in?
[JIISAMA] You're condemned
to wander inside
the uro passageway
for the rest of your life.
Aya, don't worry.
That won't happen if
you follow my instructions.
I've lived to a ripe old age
without an accident.
Just remember:
Never close doors
and never open doors.
[ITO]
Hey, Aya...
Done with the laundry yet?
[AYA]
Yes.
That's great!
Jiisama says we can play
until dinner time then!
[AYA] Really?! I'll put
this up... Wait for me.
[ITO]
Um, Aya...
Remember:
don't shut the door.
[ITO yawns]
It's so nice outside today.
[AYA]
Uh, Ito?
[ITO gasps]
[AYA]
Hey, Ito. Are you asleep?
[ITO]
Don't lift it!
[AYA]
Ito...?
It's my fault...
because I lifted the sheet.
And... And because
I didn't pin it
to the clothesline
tight enough.
Aya, you mustn't
blame yourself.
[AYA] Where's Ito?
Where did she go?
How can we--
How can we bring her back?
I'm afraid that...
there's no way, Aya.
But there-- there must be.
[AYA] I'll find a way.
I'm going to bring Ito back.
We were always together.
Playing. Laughing.
I never thought we'd be apart.
It feels like it was only
yesterday she was here.
Aya, you've been like this
for five years.
And you're still not sleeping
or eating much, I can tell.
You've got to think about
yourself for a change.
[GINKO] Would you like to enter
the uro passageway?
[GINKO]
I'll go with you.
You can see for yourself what
the uro passageway is like.
What do you say?
[GINKO]
Over there.
[GINKO] When uro infest
a tree that lies along
a light pulse vein, the trunk
swells up, like this.
It's like an allergic reaction.
Grab onto the chain
and follow me.
So that's the... passageway?
Yes. But just the end of one.
Soon, we'll reach
an uro cavern.
Ginko, how did this...?
Who put this chain here?
It was another mushi master.
This pathway's
been used as a shortcut
by mushi masters for years.
It's been said that
some of them stayed too long
and lost their memories,
so I don't use it much.
[gasps]
[GINKO] Hey, what's the matter?
Aren't you coming?
[GINKO]
Of all these passageways,
they say the one with
the chain is the only one
that leads back
to the outside world.
As for all of the others?
They connect to enclosed
spaces somewhere
and can't be opened
from the inside.
This is just one cavern.
There are thousands
of others just like it.
Do you understand now?
The chances that your sister
even passed through here
are slim.
I'm sorry, Aya.
But you're never
going to find her,
no matter what you do.
Aya. Let her go.
[GINKO] You've had a hole
in your heart for too long.
Close it
and start living again.
Ito would want you to.
[rustling]
Ito? Is that you?
[footsteps]
[NARRATOR]
Several years later,
a strange tale
began to circulate
about a certain
silk-producing village.
It was an ordinary day,
and weaving had just begun...
[screams]
[NARRATOR] ...when a girl
suddenly emerged
from a tiny cocoon.
A girl who appeared
to be ten years of age
and could not
speak a single word.
[OLD WOMAN] Wh-Where
did you come from?!
Somebody! Come here! Quick!
[NARRATOR] Later, she was
returned to her home village,
whose name and location
were on the letter
in her breast pocket.
[NARRATOR] Next: "Clothes
that Embrace the Mountain."